.TH AIFO-CODER 1 "2025-09-04" "aifo-coder" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aifo-coder \- secure Docker-based launcher for coding assistant agents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aifo-coder
.RB [ OPTIONS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ " -- " "AGENT-OPTIONS" ]
.P
.B aifo-coder
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.P
.B aifo-coder
.RB [ \-V | \-\-version ]
.P
.B aifo-coder
.B fork
.RI "[list [--json] [--all-repos] | clean [--session " "<sid>" " | --older-than " "<days>" " | --all] [--dry-run] [--yes] [--keep-dirty | --force] [--json]]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B aifo-coder
is a small Rust CLI that launches developer "agent" tools inside Docker
containers with safe defaults. It assembles a
.B docker run
command with:
.IP \[bu] 2
TTY detection for interactive sessions.
.IP \[bu]
UID:GID mapping to the invoking user.
.IP \[bu]
Conservative environment pass\-through.
.IP \[bu]
Minimal host mounts.
.IP \[bu]
An AppArmor profile on hosts that support it.
.P
To prevent concurrent runs that might contend for the same workspace,
.B aifo-coder
creates a lock file at a candidate location (see
.BR FILES ).
.P
Different agents are selected via the positional
.I COMMAND
subcommand. Additional options after
.B --
.RI ( AGENT-OPTIONS )
are passed through unchanged to the agent process inside the container.
.SH AGENTS
The set of available agents is build\-dependent. Common agents include:
.TP
.B codex
Run the OpenAI Codex\-based CLI.
.TP
.B crush
Run the Charmbracelet Crush TUI.
.P
Consult the installed documentation for agent\-specific details.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-image =IMAGE
Override the Docker image reference used for the selected agent. If unset,
the image is derived from
.BR AIFO_CODER_IMAGE ,
.BR AIFO_CODER_IMAGE_PREFIX " and " AIFO_CODER_IMAGE_TAG
(see ENVIRONMENT).
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain " " KIND
Attach language toolchains and inject PATH shims (repeatable). Supported kinds:
.B rust ,
.B node ,
.B typescript
(alias of node; alias: ts),
.B python ,
.B c\-cpp
(aliases: ccpp, c, cpp, c_cpp, c++),
.B go .
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain\-image " " KIND=IMAGE
Override image per toolchain kind (repeatable).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-toolchain\-cache
Disable named cache volumes for toolchain sidecars.
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain\-unix\-socket
On Linux, use a unix:/// socket transport for the tool\-exec proxy instead of TCP.
The socket directory is bind\-mounted into the agent at
.BR /run/aifo .
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain\-spec " " SPEC
Attach toolchains with optional versions (repeatable). Examples:
.B rust@1.80 ,
.B node@20 ,
.B python@3.12 .
When a version is provided, aifo\-coder selects a sane default image for that kind and version (e.g., rust:1.80\-slim, node:20\-bookworm\-slim, python:3.12\-slim).
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain\-bootstrap " " OPT
Bootstrap actions for attached toolchains (repeatable). Supported:
.B typescript=global
(which installs a global TypeScript compiler in the node sidecar as a fallback when no project\-local compiler is present).
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AIFO_CODER_IMAGE
If set to a non\-empty string, use this Docker image reference for all agents,
overriding per\-agent defaults and \-\-image.
.TP
.B AIFO_CODER_IMAGE_PREFIX
Prefix used to construct default image references when
.BR AIFO_CODER_IMAGE
is not set. Defaults to
.BR aifo\-coder .
.TP
.B AIFO_CODER_IMAGE_TAG
Tag used to construct default image references when
.BR AIFO_CODER_IMAGE
is not set. Defaults to
.BR latest .
.TP
.B AIFO_CODER_REGISTRY_PREFIX
Override the Docker registry prefix for image pulls. If unset, the launcher tests connectivity to
https://repository.migros.net
and uses
.B repository.migros.net/
when reachable; otherwise no registry prefix is used and Docker Hub is assumed. Set to an empty string to force Docker Hub.
.TP
.B AIFO_CODER_APPARMOR_PROFILE
If set to a non\-empty string on Linux hosts whose Docker daemon reports
AppArmor support, this value is applied as the container's AppArmor profile
(via
.BR \-\-security\-opt " " apparmor=PROFILE ).
When unset, the launcher chooses a sensible default (a custom profile on
native Linux; docker\-default on macOS/Windows Docker\-in\-VM).
.TP
.B XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
When inside a Git repository, used for the repository\-scoped fallback lock path:
.BR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/aifo\-coder.\fIhash(repo_root)\fR.lock .
When not inside a Git repository, the legacy candidate path is:
.BR $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/aifo\-coder.lock .
.TP
.B HOME
Used for default paths and may influence host mounts inside the container.
.TP
.B GNUPGHOME
May be passed through to the container environment to enable GPG operations,
depending on the agent and launcher defaults.
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_URL
Internal: URL the agent shims contact to execute tools via sidecars
(e.g., http://host.docker.internal:PORT/exec). Set automatically when
\-\-toolchain is used as a global option.
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_TOKEN
Internal: bearer token used by shims to authenticate to the proxy. Set
automatically when \-\-toolchain is used.
.TP
.B AIFO_SESSION_NETWORK
Internal: ephemeral Docker network name that the agent joins to communicate
with toolchain sidecars (created automatically per session).
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_TIMEOUT_SECS
Per-request timeout in seconds for the toolexec proxy (default: 60). Increase on slow CI,
lower to fail fast on unresponsive tool invocations.
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_USE_UNIX
On Linux, when set to
.BR 1 ,
the launcher starts the toolexec proxy bound to a unix domain socket and mounts
the socket directory into the agent. The shim uses
.BR unix:///run/aifo/toolexec.sock
to connect.
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_UNIX_DIR
Host directory containing the proxy's unix socket (set automatically when unix
transport is enabled). It is bind\-mounted into the agent at
.BR /run/aifo .
.TP
.B AIFO_TOOLEEXEC_ADD_HOST
On Linux, when set to
.BR 1 ,
the launcher adds
.BR \-\-add\-host=host.docker.internal:host\-gateway
to the agent container to ensure connectivity to the host proxy in TCP mode.
.TP
.B AIFO_SHIM_DIR
Path on the host to a directory containing the shim binary and symlinks to be
bind-mounted into the agent at
.BR /opt/aifo/bin .
This allows overriding the embedded shims in the agent image for development
or debugging. When unset, the embedded shims shipped in the image are used.
.SH SECURITY
On Linux hosts with AppArmor support, the launcher attempts to run agents
under a constrained AppArmor profile to reduce kernel attack surface and
limit syscalls and capabilities. An AppArmor profile may be installed
system\-wide by your distribution or administrator. When AppArmor
is unavailable (e.g., macOS Docker\-in\-VM) the launcher falls back to the
Docker default profile.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B <repo-root>/.aifo\-coder.lock
Preferred in-repo lock file when inside a Git repository.
.TP
.B $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/aifo\-coder.\fIhash(repo_root)\fR.lock
Repository-scoped fallback lock file (uses a stable hash of the canonical repo root).
.TP
.B ~/.aifo\-coder.lock
Legacy per-user lock file candidate (used when not inside a Git repository).
.TP
.B /tmp/aifo\-coder.lock
Legacy fallback lock file candidate (used when other candidates are unavailable).
.TP
.B /etc/apparmor.d/aifo\-coder
System AppArmor profile (if installed) used to constrain containerized agents.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The launcher propagates the exit status of the agent process running inside
the container. A non\-zero exit code indicates failure reported by the agent
or the container runtime.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run the Codex agent with default image:
.P
.nf
aifo\-coder codex \-\- \-\-help
.fi
.TP
Run the Crush agent with a custom image:
.P
.nf
aifo\-coder \-\-image aifo\-coder\-crush:nightly crush
.fi
.SH TOOLCHAIN
The toolchain subcommand launches a sidecar container for a language toolchain
and executes the specified command within it.
.TP
.B aifo-coder toolchain
.I kind
\-\-
.I args...
.P
Supported kinds:
.B rust ,
.B node ,
.B typescript
(alias of node; alias: ts),
.B python ,
.B c\-cpp
(aliases: ccpp, c, cpp, c_cpp, c++),
.B go .
.P
Default c\-cpp image:
.B aifo\-coder\-toolchain\-cpp:latest
Build locally with
.BR make " build\-toolchain\-cpp"
or override via
.BR \-\-toolchain\-image " c\-cpp=IMAGE" .
.P
Options:
.TP
.BR \-\-toolchain\-image " " =IMAGE
Override the image reference used for the toolchain sidecar.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-toolchain\-cache
Disable named cache volumes for this run.
.P
Examples:
.P
.nf
aifo\-coder toolchain rust \-\- cargo \-\-version
aifo\-coder toolchain node \-\- npx \-\-version
aifo\-coder toolchain python \-\- python \-m pip \-\-version
aifo\-coder toolchain c\-cpp \-\- cmake \-\-version
# Versioned specs and bootstrap
aifo\-coder \-\-toolchain\-spec rust@1.80 \-\-toolchain\-spec node@20 aider \-\- cargo \-\-version
aifo\-coder \-\-toolchain node \-\-toolchain\-bootstrap typescript=global aider \-\- tsc \-\-version
.fi
.P
When provided as a global option, \-\-toolchain attaches sidecars and injects PATH
shims for the selected kinds so that commands like
.B cargo ,
.B npx ,
.B python ,
.B gcc ,
or
.B go
invoked inside the agent are transparently executed via the sidecars.
.P
Dev\-tool routing:
For common development tools
.B make ,
.B cmake ,
.B ninja ,
.B pkg\-config ,
.B gcc ,
.B g++ ,
.B clang ,
.B clang++ ,
.B cc
and
.B c++ ,
the proxy selects the first running sidecar that provides the tool, in this order:
.BR c\-cpp ,
.BR rust ,
.BR go ,
.BR node ,
then
.BR python .
This avoids starting unnecessary sidecars when a tool is already available in another running sidecar (for example, \fBmake\fR inside the rust toolchain).
.P
.SH TOOLCHAIN CACHE
Purge all named Docker volumes used for toolchain caches. This removes caches for
Rust (cargo registry/git), Node (npm), Python (pip), C/C++ (ccache), and Go.
.P
.nf
aifo\-coder toolchain\-cache\-clear
.fi
.P
Embedded shims:
Agent images embed a compiled
.B aifo-shim
at
.B /opt/aifo/bin
with symlinks for common tools (cargo, npm/npx/tsc, python/pip, gcc/clang, go) and a host shim
.B notifications-cmd
that sends a request to the host listener to run
.B say
only when it exactly matches the
.B notifications-command
configured in
.BR ~/.aider.conf.yml .
Mismatches are rejected (403; exit 86).
The PATH is prepended so these tools are available in the agent. For development
or debugging you can override embedded shims by bind\-mounting a host directory
via
.BR AIFO_SHIM_DIR
to
.BR /opt/aifo/bin .
.P
Linux connectivity note:
When toolchains are attached, the agent is launched with a host\-gateway entry so
.B host.docker.internal
resolves to the host proxy. If connectivity issues arise on Linux, ensure the launcher
adds
.BR \-\-add\-host=host.docker.internal:host\-gateway
(which it does automatically when toolchains are enabled).
.SH FORK MODE
Fork mode creates N\~cloned panes of the current Git repository and launches agent instances in each clone using platform\-appropriate orchestrators.

.P
Flags:
.IP \[bu] 2
\fB\-\-fork\fR \fIN\fR (N\>=2): enable fork mode (tmux on Linux/macOS/WSL; Windows Terminal preferred on Windows).
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-fork\-include\-dirty\fR: include uncommitted changes via a snapshot commit using a temporary index and \fBgit commit\-tree\fR (no hooks/signing).
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-fork\-dissociate\fR: clone with \fB\-\-dissociate\fR for independence (more disk, avoids shared object GC).
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-fork\-session\-name\fR: set session/window name (default \fIaifo\-<sid>\fR).
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-fork\-layout\fR \fItiled|even\-h|even\-v\fR: tmux layout.
.IP \[bu]
\fB\-\-fork\-keep\-on\-failure\fR: keep created clones on orchestration failure (default: keep).

.P
Maintenance commands:
.P
.B aifo\-coder fork list
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.RB [ \-\-all\-repos ]
.br
.B aifo\-coder fork clean
.RB [ \-\-session " " \fIsid\fR
|
\-\-older\-than " " \fIdays\fR
|
\-\-all ]
.RB [ \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-\-yes ]
.RB [ \-\-keep\-dirty " | " \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-json ]
.P
Safety:
- Panes are protected from deletion by default when dirty, ahead of base, or base unknown. \fB\-\-keep\-dirty\fR deletes only clean panes; \fB\-\-force\fR overrides protection.

.P
Paths and naming:
- Session dir: \fI<repo\-root>/.aifo\-coder/forks/<sid>\fR
- Pane dirs: \fIpane\-1..N\fR under the session dir
- Branches: \fIfork/<base|detached>/<sid>\-<i>\fR

.P
Per\-pane state mounts:
- Each pane mounts its own state dir on the host to avoid races:
  \fI~/.aifo\-coder/state/<sid>/pane\-<i>/{.aider,.codex,.crush}\fR
- Override base via \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_STATE_BASE\fR.

.P
Environment:
- \fBAIFO_CODER_SKIP_LOCK\fR=1 (children skip acquiring locks)
- \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_SESSION\fR, \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_INDEX\fR, \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_STATE_DIR\fR
- \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_STATE_BASE\fR, \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_STALE_DAYS\fR, \fBAIFO_CODER_FORK_AUTOCLEAN\fR

.P
Post\-session merging:
- Fetch/merge, cherry\-pick, rebase, or format\-patch/am from a pane as needed. See the README for concrete command examples.

.P
Notes:
- Linux/macOS/WSL require \fBtmux\fR in PATH. On macOS (Docker Desktop or Colima), install via Homebrew: \fBbrew install tmux\fR.
- Windows prefers \fBwt.exe\fR (Windows Terminal); falls back to PowerShell windows or Git Bash/mintty.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR docker (1),
.BR apparmor (7),
.BR sh (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Amir Guindehi <amir.guindehi@mgb.ch> and contributors.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (c) the aifo\-coder authors.
License: Apache License 2.0. See
.BR /usr/share/licenses/aifo\-coder/LICENSE
or https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
